MSC4405: Deprecate the emoji method for SAS verification (#4405)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4405-deprecate-emoji-verification.md

Reviewer: Implementation requirements:

* [ ] Some notion of approval from product-focused teams

Author: As a data point, Nico says that Famedly is already only using decimal verification, due to requests from customers.

Reviewer 2: This looks easy and clear to me, and arguably less intimidating than emojis.

speakers of a language, for example, 🌵 or ⌛.

A client could offer to show the names in multiple languages, but that would
complicate the user interface.

In addition, we made at least one error in choosing emojis: 🔧 is "spanner" in
en_GB, but "wrench" in en_US, so there may even be confusion between users
speaking the same language.  The spec picks "spanner" as the name, and if a
British and American user are verifying each other, the British user can explain
it to the American user.  But if two American users verifying each other may
need to figure out on their own what a "spanner" is.  (✈️ suffers a similar
problem, but less severely, since it is likely that users can figure out that
"aeroplane" is the same as "airplane".)

#### Differences in emoji representations

Clients may use different fonts for displaying emojis.  Some clients (such as
terminal-based clients) may not have a choice in which font is used.  Thus users
may not see the exact same images on the clients, causing them to wonder if the
difference is significant.  The standardised names were intended to help with
this, but in practice, it turns out that people still get confused.

> 

Reviewer 3: One thing that might help further cement the motivation is that the complexity of user instructions differs significantly between the two verification methods. For decimal verification, something like "Compare these numbers with the other device" is sufficient and unambiguous. For emoji verification, you need to explain that the images might look differently on the other device and might also have different names.

I'm not sure if this captures it particularly well but here is a suggestion:

```suggestion

#### Complexity of user instructions

It can be difficult to formulate instructions for what to actually compare during
emoji verification for non-technical users. For instance, users have to understand
that they don't need to compare the emoji graphics pixel by pixel. They also need
to understand that they don't need to compare the emoji names letter by letter
because they might not be in the same language. This complexity undermines the
anticipated simplicity that emoji verification was meant to provide.

```

syllables.  Therefore it should take similar effort to speak the strings out
loud.

Finally, emojis often need to be displayed at a larger size to be recognisable.
Along with the fact that the name is displayed with the emojis means that
decimals should not take any more visual space than emojis.

### Decimals look less friendly

Emojis make verification look more friendly, while decimals make verification
look more "techy".  And it is true that if something looks more friendly, then
people are more likely to find it easier to use.  However, I believe that the
actual usability benefits from deprecating the emoji method outweighs the
perceived usability of using emojis.

## Alternatives

[MSC4347](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/issues/4347)
proposes to standardize the visual representation of the emojis.  This MSC tries
to fix the issue of differences in emoji representation, but does not fix the
translation issue.

[MSC4404](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4404)
proposes to specify that the emoji names should be used rather than the visual
representations.  This MSC tries to fix the both the issue of differences in

> emoji representation, and the translation issue.  As a historical note, this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
representations.  This MSC tries to fix both the issue of differences in
emoji representation, and the translation issue.  As a historical note, this
```

# MSC4405: Deprecate the emoji method for SAS verification

Emojis are cute and fun.  They can be used to make things seem more friendly,
and to make a very technical process feel more approachable.  That was the hope
when the emoji method was introduced for [Short Authentication String (SAS)
verification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#short-authentication-string-sas-verification).

In practice, emojis present some usability problems.

## Background

When SAS authentication was first introduced, two methods were defined: emoji
and decimal.  The intention was that emoji would be the primary method, but for
clients who were unable to present emojis, the decimal method was added.  In
order to ensure that any pair of clients could verify, the decimal method was
made mandatory since it is the lowest common denominator.

### Problems with emojis

#### Communicating the emojis

> When two people verify each other in person, they can look at each others'

Reviewer 4: this is about people verifying each other in an end to end encryption context, but what about a user bootstrapping a new device by verifying with one of their existing, verified ones? do we get the decimal verification method instead of the emoji one there as well, or is this applicable only to verification between the devices of different users?

Reviewer 5: > do we get the decimal verification method instead of the emoji one there as well, or is this applicable only to verification between the devices of different users?

My understanding is that this proposal encompasses both the E2EE user and device verification

While it would make little sense to deprecate emoji method for cross-device verification(as a quick glance on both devices' screens is more than enough to check whether they're the same or not, and it is faster than comparing numbers), _not_ deprecating it just for CDV makes even less sense if it's being deprecated for cross-user verification

French.  They both speak English, but neither is fluent in it.  So Alice's
client shows Alice the German names for the emojis, and Bob's client shows Bob
the French names for the emojis.  Thus Alice and Bob need to translate the
German or French words into English.  While the emojis were chosen to be easily
describable, they are not all common words that would be known by non-native
speakers of a language, for example, 🌵 or ⌛.

A client could offer to show the names in multiple languages, but that would
complicate the user interface.

In addition, we made at least one error in choosing emojis: 🔧 is "spanner" in
en_GB, but "wrench" in en_US, so there may even be confusion between users
speaking the same language.  The spec picks "spanner" as the name, and if a
British and American user are verifying each other, the British user can explain
it to the American user.  But if two American users are verifying each other, they may
need to figure out on their own what a "spanner" is.  (✈️ suffers a similar
problem, but less severely, since it is likely that users can figure out that
"aeroplane" is the same as "airplane".)

> 

Reviewer 5: This extends well beyond _just_ emojis, any sort of pictogram(even universal, like recycling: ♻️) will fail in a cross-language scenario presented(Alice speaks French, Bob speaks German, Both speak English, but neither is fluent enough)

Here's an example:

- Shapes
  <details>
  <summary>Translation Examples</summary>

  - **Triangle** (English)
    - *good (Similar to English)*
      - French - Triangle
      - Spanish - Triángulo
      - Italian - Triangolo
      - Portuguese - Triângulo
      - Romanian - Triunghi
    - *bad (Different from English)*
      - German - Dreieck
      - Finnish - Kolmio
      - Hungarian - Háromszög
      - Turkish - Üçgen
      - Dutch - Driehoek

  - **Square** (English)
    - *good (matches English root logic)*
      - German - Quadrat
      - Spanish - Cuadrado
      - Italian - Quadrato
      - Portuguese - Quadrado
      - Russian - Квадрат (Kvadrat)
    - *bad (no visual match to "Square"/"Quad")*
      - French - Carré
      - Finnish - Neliö
      - Hungarian - Négyzet
      - Turkish - Kare
      - Romanian - Pătrat

  - **Pentagon**
    - *good*
      - Spanish - Pentágono
      - Italian - Pentagono
      - French - Pentagone
      - Portuguese - Pentágono
      - German - Pentagon
    - *bad*
      - Finnish - Viisikulmio (Five-corner)
      - Hungarian - Ötszög
      - Turkish - Beşgen
      - Russian - Пятиугольник (Pyatiugolnik)
      - Polish - Pięciokąt

  - **Hexagon**
    - *good*
      - Spanish - Hexágono
      - French - Hexagone
      - Portuguese - Hexágono
      - Romanian - Hexagon
      - German - Hexagon
    - *bad*
      - Italian - Esagono (Drops the 'H' sound)
      - Dutch - Zeshoek (Six-corner)
      - Finnish - Kuusikulmio
      - Turkish - Altıgen
      - Russian - Шестиугольник (Shestiugolnik)

  - **Cross**
    - *good*
      - Spanish - Cruz
      - Italian - Croce
      - Portuguese - Cruz
      - French - Croix
      - Romanian - Cruce
    - *bad*
      - German - Kreuz
      - Finnish - Risti
      - Hungarian - Kereszt
      - Turkish - Haç
      - Russian - Крест (Krest)

  - **Line**
    - *good*
      - Spanish - Línea
      - Italian - Linea
      - French - Ligne
      - Portuguese - Linha
      - Russian - Линия (Liniya)
    - *bad*
      - Finnish - Viiva
      - Hungarian - Vonal
      - Turkish - Çizgi
      - Indonesian - Garis
      - Czech - Čára
  </details>

this, but in practice, it turns out that people still get confused.

#### Complexity of user instructions

It can be difficult to formulate instructions for what to actually compare during
emoji verification for non-technical users. For instance, users have to understand
that they don't need to compare the emoji graphics pixel by pixel. They also need
to understand that they don't need to compare the emoji names letter by letter
because they might not be in the same language. This complexity undermines the
anticipated simplicity that emoji verification was meant to provide.

### Decimal numbers do not have the same issues

Decimal numbers, the other method defined for SAS verification, do not have the
issues mentioned above.  Decimal numbers are widely understood (even in
languages that do not natively use Arabic numerals), so people will not struggle
to describe them to each other.  People who know enough of a language to have a
conversation in that language are likely to know enough about numbers in that
language be able to compare them.  And since the set of numbers is commonly
known, people do not need to worry about what differences in rendering are
significant.

## Proposal

> The emoji method of SAS verification is deprecated.  Clients SHOULD only offer
> to use the decimal method.

Reviewer: to future proof this a bit if/when we add a different mechanism:

```suggestion
The emoji method of SAS verification is deprecated.  Clients SHOULD NOT offer
to use the emoji method.
```
